Capped futures (#2251)
vegaprotocol/specs: protocol/0093-CFUT-product_builtin_capped_future.md

> # Built-in [Product](./0051-PROD-product.md): Capped future

Reviewer: Note that this is expected to be implemented by adding two parameters two the standard Future product. These parameters will be such that leaving them out (i.e. setting them to default values) will result in a standard future.

There won't be a separate product. It would make sense to rework the content in this file to align with this approach.

Author: Sure, I'll move it to a futures product spec.

This built-in product provides capped futures contracts which are similar in architecture to fixed-expiry [cash settled futures](./0016-PFUT-product_builtin_future.md) with the main difference being that prices in the market are only allowed to fluctuate within the `[0, max_price]` range. This applies to all prices in the market, that's is:

- order (and thus trade) prices,
- mark prices,
- final settlement price.

The `max_price` is set at market creation time and it's immutable throughout the market's lifecycle.

## 1. Product parameters

Capped future should have all the product parameters and behaviour of a standard fixed-expiry cash settled [future](./0016-PFUT-product_builtin_future.md#1-product-parameters) as well as: 

> 1. `max_price`: specifies the price cap for the market, specified formatted with market decimal places,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `max_price`: specifies the price cap for the market, an integer understood in the context of market decimal places,
```

1. `binary_settlement`: if set to `true` settlement price other than `0` or `max_price` will be ignored,

> 1. `fully_collateralised`: if set to `true` the [fully collateralised margin mode](./0019-MCAL-margin_calculator.md#fully-collateralised) is used.

Reviewer: Ideally fully collateralised would not be a true/false flag but an alternative risk calculator / risk model that can be specified instead of log normal. (It won't need any parameters.)

**_Unless there's a technical implementation reason from @jeremyletang that we won't be doing that_** then we should describe it that way rather than as a separate parameter. This would avoid any ambiguity and any idea that a risk model could also be specified. If a log normal model is required for other aspects of the protocol it would be preferable for that to be done via separate parameters.

Author: Risk model is still required for price monitoring bounds and liquidity score calculation at the moment. 

How would that play out with keeping it all within standard futures product? We'd have to specify risk models separately depending on use (margin calculation, price monitoring bounds, liquidity score)?

Reviewer: Yeah

So from an (idealised, conceptual…) architectural perspective, at least as imagined to date, "risk model" (or "risk calculator" or whatever we want to call it) attached to an instrument to make it tradable is the calculation logic that is used to determine how much margin is required for a [real or potential] position.

That means that it is conceptually something like this:

```
Market {
    product: Future {
        … future params …
    }
    risk_model: LogNormal {    // or FullyCollateralised { }
        … risk model params …
    }
    extensions: [
        PriceMonitoring {
            // optional: model: SomeModel { … and params … } to not use the market's default
            … price monitoring params …
        }
        LiquiditySla {
            // optional: model: SomeModel { … and params … } to not use the market's default
            … liquidity SLA params …
        }
    ]
}
```

…where the market can't exist without a way to calculate margin, but could theoretically:

* have no price monitoring or no liquidity protocol;
* have them but use different models/calculators for each; or even
* have price monitoring or liquidity protocols that use some other calculation (e.g. simple linear maths and specific parameters) rather than a risk model of the type that powers margin calcs and provides probabilities of price moves.

_NB:_ price monitoring and liquidity SLA live under `extensions` here because conceptually they are blobs of code that hook into product and market events (lifecycle events, trades, price moves, external price data, order book changes, etc.) and iteract with the market via an API to do things like change its trading mode (suspend/resume, enter/extend auction, end auction, block trade(s), cancel order(s), etc.). There could be many other such blobs in future providing extra protections, additional reward schemes, or whatever.

Currently it is **implicit by the naming** (_risk model_ rather than, say, _margin model_) that the market has a single risk model, and that is also **de facto the case in implementation**, because none of the modules that require such calculation allow specifying their own.

It would be possible, and is likely a good idea, to make this more explicit in future, with markets being more like:

```
Market {
    product: Future {
        … future params …
    }
    margin_calculator: RiskBasedMargin {    // where you could also have, e.g.: FixedMargin { ratio = 0.1 }
       model: LogNormal {    // or FullyCollateralised { }
            … risk model params …
        }
    }
    extensions: [
        RiskBasedPriceMonitoring {
            model: SomeModel { … and params … }    // no longer optional
            … other price monitoring params …
        }
        RiskBasedLiquiditySla {
            model: SomeModel { … and params … }    // no longer optional
            … liquidity SLA params …
        }
    ]
}
```

Of course, if we did that then the next step, for some markets would probably be to remove the risk model entirely, as for [at least higher liquidity/volume, and maybe all] delta one markets it's not really needed!

```
Market {
    product: Future {
        … future params …
    }
    margin_calculator: FixedMargin {
        ratio = 0.025    // 40x leverage
    }
    extensions: [
        PriceMonitoring {
            triggers: [
                … trigger definitions use simple relative moves in a horizon, or similar …
            ]
        }
        LiquiditySla {
            … liquidity SLA params specify requirements and fee distribution without ref. to a risk model …
        }
    ]
}
```

That's probably something we want to be able to do in the not too distant future.

As for what that exactly means for this specification, I am not entirely sure. But I do think we should try not to  end up keeping the market-wide risk model in a situation where it's used for everything _**except**_ margin calculation, which is special cased by a flag. That doesn't seem great.

Validation: `max_price` > 0.

## 2. Additional considerations

### 2.1 Order price validation

In order to aid smooth operation of the market and safeguard against user errors or manipulation attempts order prices should be validated so that the maximum price of any order is `max_price`. Peg orders should be validated so that if the resulting price would be higher at any point it gets temporarily capped at `max_price`.

### 2.2 Mark price validation

> Irrespective of how the mark price is obtained in the market, the final value to be applied used in the [mark-to-market](./0003-MTMK-mark_to_market_settlement.md) calculation must be capped so that `mark_price = min(max_price, mark_price_candidate)`.

Reviewer: Capping is inconsistent with ignoring out of bounds values below. Given we changed those recently I wanted to check we definitely want to cap here?

Author: I don't have a strong opinion, ignoring it sounds fine too, I'll change it to that.

### 2.3 Settlement price validation

When `binary_settlement` parameter is set to `false` any value `0 <= settlement_price <= max_price` should be accepted as a settlement price.

When `binary_settlement` parameter is set to `true` only `settlement_price=0` or `settlement_price=max_price` should be accepted.

Any other values get ignored and market does not settle, instead it still waits for subsequent values from the settlement oracle until a value which passes the above conditions arrives.

## 3. Binary options

Please note that selecting a capped future with `binary_settlement` flag set to `true` allows representing binary options markets.

## Acceptance Criteria

- Attempt to create a capped futures market with a price cap of `0` fails. (<a name="0093-CFUT-001" href="#0093-CFUT-001">0093-CFUT-001</a>)

- Order with a `price > max_price` gets rejected. (<a name="0093-CFUT-002" href="#0093-CFUT-002">0093-CFUT-002</a>)

- When the reference of a pegged sell order moves so that the implied order price is higher than `max_price` the implied order price gets capped at. `max_price` (<a name="0093-CFUT-003" href="#0093-CFUT-003">0093-CFUT-003</a>)

> - When market is setup to use oracle based mark price and the value received from oracle is less than `max_price` then it gets used as is and mark-to-market flows are calculated according to that price. (<a name="0093-CFUT-004" href="#0093-CFUT-004">0093-CFUT-004</a>)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When market is setup to use oracle based mark price and the value received from oracle is less than `max_price` then it gets used as it is and mark-to-market flows are calculated according to that price. (<a name="0093-CFUT-004" href="#0093-CFUT-004">0093-CFUT-004</a>)
```

- When the final settlement price candidate received from the oracle is greater than `0` and less than  `max_price` and `binary_settlement` flag is set to `true` the value gets ignored, next a value of `0` comes in from the settlement oracle and market settles correctly. (<a name="0093-CFUT-008" href="#0093-CFUT-008">0093-CFUT-008</a>)

- When market is setup with `fully_collateralised = true` option and it has parties with open positions settling it at a price of `max_price` works correctly and the sum of all final settlement cashflows equals 0 (loss socialisation does not happen). Assuming general account balances of all parties were `0` after opening the positions and all of their funds were in the margin accounts: long parties end up with balances equal to `position size * max_price` and short parties end up with `0` balances. (<a name="0093-CFUT-009" href="#0093-CFUT-009">0093-CFUT-009</a>)

> - When market is setup with `fully_collateralised = true` option and it has parties with open positions settling it at a price of `0` works correctly and the sum of all final settlement cashflows equals 0 (loss socialisation does not happen). Assuming general account balances of all parties were `0` after opening the positions and all of their funds were in the margin accounts: short parties end up with balances equal to `abs(position size) * max_price` and long parties end up with `0` balances. (<a name="0093-CFUT-010" href="#0093-CFUT-010">0093-CFUT-010</a>)

Reviewer: TODO: add scenarious for the mark price being 0 and max price during trading and no close outs occurring

Author: Added these now
